The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
What is the GDPR?  
The law on Data Protection has changed from 25th May 2018 . The General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a new, Europe -wide law that replaces the Data 
Protection Act 1998 in the UK  and supersede s the  UK Data Protection Act  1998 
(DPA 1998).  It is part of the wider package of reform to the data protection 
landscape that includes the Data Protection Act 2018  (DPA 2018).   
The GDPR sets out requirements for how organisations need to handle personal 
data from 25 May 2018.  In addition to other changes, it will enhance the rights of 
people whose data is held (known as data subjects in the Data Protection Act) and 
give them more control over what happens to their data.  
It also allows for financial penalties to be imposed on any organisation that breaches 
those rights or does not comply with the ‘accountability principle ’ – which basically 
means t hat data controllers and data processors i.e. organisations  and certain 
individuals – including councils , need to put technical and organisational measures in 
place to protect the data they hold from loss, unauthorised access etc and to ensure 
the rights o f data subjects are protected.  
The GDPR has  direct effect across all EU member states and has already been 
passed. This means organisations will still have to comply with this regulation and 
we will still have to look to the GDPR for most legal obligation s. However, the GDPR 
gives member states limited opportunities to make provisions for how it applies in 
their country. One element of the D ata Protection Act 2018  is the details of these. It 
is therefore important the GDPR and the 2018 Act  are read side by side.  
What else does the DPA 2018 Act  cover?  
 The DPA 2018 has a part dealing with processing that does not fall within EU law, for 
example, where it is related to immigration. It applies GDPR standards but it has 
been amended to adjust those that would not work in the national context.  
 It also has a part that implements the EU’s Law Enforcement Directive.  This is part of 
the EU’s data  protection reform framework and is separate from the GDPR. The Bill 
has provisions covering those involved in law enforcement processing. The ICO has 
produced a 12 step guide for preparing for the law enforcement requirements (part 3) 
of the DP Bill . Our webinar also has helpful guidance on th e preparations 
organisations should be making  to prepare for the change in legislation.  
 National security is also outside the scope of EU law. The Government has decided 
that it is important the intelligence services are required to comply with internation ally 
recognised data protection standards, so there are provisions based on Council of 
Europe Data Protection Convention 108 that apply to them.  
The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
 There are also separate parts to cover the ICO and our duties, functions and powers 
plus the enforcement provis ions. The DPA  1998 is being repealed so it makes the 
changes necessary to deal with the interaction between FOIA/EIR and the DPA  
 The new regime is more stringent and  gives the data subject enhanced rights.  
 In the new regime, the eight principles become six  principles  
The 6 GDPR Data Principles  
The six general principles under the new legislation are very similar to the current 
law: 
1. Personal information shall be processed lawfully, fairly and in a transparent 
manner.  
2. Personal information shall be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate 
purposes and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible with 
those purposes.  
3. Personal information shall be adequate, relevant, and limited to what is 
necessary  
4. Personal information shall be accurate and, where necessary, kept up -to-date 
5. Personal information shall be retained only for as long as necessary.  
6. Personal information shall be processed in an appropriate manner to maintain 
security.  
You must hav e a lawful basis to process  personal data. Consent is one of them but 
there are alternatives. There are six available lawful bases  set out in Article 6  of the 
GDPR. These are consent , contract, legal obligation, vital interests, public task, 
legitimate interests  in total. No single basis is better or more important than  the 
others . Which is most appropriate will depend on your purpose and the relationship 
with the individual .  
 
What information does the GDPR apply to?   
The GDPR applies to ‘personal data’, which means any information relating to an 
identifiable person who can be directly or indirectly identified in particular by 
reference to an identifier. You can find more detail in the key definitions section of 
the ICO’s Guide to the GDPR  by following this link  https://ico.org.uk/for -
organisations/guide -to-the-general -data-protection -regulation -gdpr/key-definitions /. 
Personal Data (PD) include s: 
• an identifier, e.g. a name, email address, phone number  
• personal identification numbers, e.g. bank account, national insurance 
number  
The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
• factors specific to an individual’s physical, physiological, genetic, mental, 
economic, cultural or social identity. This would include anything about a 
disability.  
New kinds of identifying information which GDPR includes in the definition of 
personal data are:  
• location data - data that has any kind of geographic position attached to it, 
e.g. data collected by wireless networks, swipe cards and smart mobile 
devices that provide location tracking  
• online identifiers, e.g. mobile device IDs, browser cookies, IP addresses  
Special Categories of Data  (set out in Articl e 9 of GDPR)  are those which are more 
sensitive relating to , race, ethnicity, political opinion, genetic or health related data 
and sexual orientation , and so needs more protection.  
If you are processing data that falls within this category , you must first  identify a 
lawful basis under Article 6 and a separate condition for  processing special  category 
data under Article 9 .   
The broadening in the definition of personal data is important becau se it reflects 
changes in technology and the way that organisations  collect data about individuals . 
Under the Data Protection Act 1998 it has been a requirement for you as a councillor 
to be registered as a Data Controller with the Information Commissioners Office 
(ICO) and pay a fee. (Some Councils have paid  the fees for their Councillors).  
This is because as a councillor   
1. You make use  of personal data provided by your council in the same way as 
an officer of the council might make use of data. Council officers and its 
suppliers will be subject to the controls of GDPR  in the same way they are 
under DPA 1998 . You will be covered by your Councils notification and fee.  
2. You use  personal case work material in your own right when you  collect or are 
given personal data through commun ications with your resid ents.  
3. You access, collect and dep loy personal data through you r political 
campaigning and ac tivation – with or without the use of political agents or 
political parties  if you represent one . 
As a Data Controller you will need to comply with the new GDPR and Data 
Protection Act 2018  unless as a Councillor you do not make any use whatsoever of a 
computer/tablet/smart phone etc in connection with your Councillor activities of any 
sort.   
 
You should already be keeping p ersonal data secure and only using your official 
email address to respond. You will already be aware to be careful with whom you 
share personal data and to keep information for no longer than you need to. This 
might include other councillors in multi member wards.  The new GDPR /ACT  will 
The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
place a duty on you to keep certain records as it is your duty to show that you are 
complying with the law. It is also designed to g ive data subjects (your resid ents) 
greater rights to control and access the data you hold about them.  
 New requirements:  
• Keep a record of your processing activities, this is to show your compliance 
with the legislation.  
• Give a more detailed Privacy Notice when you collect personal data.  
• Tell subjects of their rights . 
• Have appropriate security measures in place to prot ect personal data you 
hold.  
• Regularly review and d elete ‘old’ data you no longer need . 
• Report any breaches to  the ICO within 72 hours.  
Record Keeping   
To comply with the Act, you must keep certain records if your proc essing is more 
than occasional e.g . for complaints , or you are processing ‘special categories of 
data’ e.g. anything concerning race, religion, health, sexual orientation etc. It is 
possible that you will have health data concerning your resident s and you should 
record (perhaps in a word do cument):  
(i) The name and contact details of the Data Controller – yourself;  
(ii) The purpose of your processing and legal basis for it e.g. to investigate 
complaints;  
(iii) The categories of data you hold and the categories of data subjects’  e.g. 
name and address, email, medical information for constituents and 
complainants;  
(iv) Anyone you share the data with e.g. other Councillors/Council Officers/other 
services.  
(v) How long you keep data for e.g. 6 months after the case is closed  
(vi) What security you ha ve in place to protect it e.g. password protection, only 
using secure council provided email address, documents locking in a 
cupboard etc.  
The information Commissioner can ask to see this record to ensure your compliance.  
Privacy Notices   
You are required  to give a Privacy Notice to the person you collect personal data 
from at the time you collect it.  
This could be a standard paragraph at the end of an email when you acknowledge 
receipt of a complaint or you can give it verbally if you ta ke a telephone ca ll in which 
case you should record that you have given it verbally.  
The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
You should not use personal data other than for the purpose which you stated when 
you collected it. If you wish to use it for another purpose then you should return to 
the person and seek  their consent for this additional processing. If you are collecting 
special categories of data then the person should give you explici t consent to 
process this data. This might mean you should  obtain their signature and you should 
keep a record that they have given consent.  
The GDPR sets out the information you should supply and when individuals should 
be informed.  
 
A Privacy Notice should include:  
(i) That you are the Data Controller and your contact details;  
(ii) The purpose of processing and legal basis for doing so (to assist with their 
complaint);  
(iii) Who you will share it with e.g. other Councillors/Council Officers/ any other 
agencies;  
(iv) The retention period i.e. how long you will keep it for e.g. for 6 months aft er 
their complaint has been finalised;  
(v) That they can withdraw their consent to you processing their data by 
contacting you and asking you to stop doing so;  
(vi) That they can access a copy of the information you hold, ask for it to be 
corrected if it is wrong  or for it to be deleted;  
(vii) To contact you if they have a complaint about how their data is handled and if 
it is not resolved to contact the ICO.   
There’s more information in the ICO’s right to be informed section of the Guide to the 
GDPR.  https://ico.org.uk/for -organisations/guide -to-the-general -data-protection -
regulation -gdpr/individual -rights/right -to-be-informed/  
Rights  
As stated in the Privacy Notice you must comply with certain rights which the data 
subjects have. T his includes allowing them to access all the data you hold on them, 
this is usually by way of a copy of emails or letters. You have one month to comply 
with a request which is called ‘subject access’ . You must remember NOT to supply 
them with anyone else’s  personal data as they are only entitled to access their own.  
They can also ask for their data to be corrected, moved, restricted or erased in 
certain circumstances.  
Security  
You should ensure the security of the personal data that you hold by only using your 
official email address and being careful if you work in public areas so that you are 
not overlooked. You should not leave documents or co mputers/ iPads on whilst you 
are out of the room and should ensure that you have a password to access the 
necessary  files. You should ensure the device that you use is stored securely when 
The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
not in use. When emailing you should put the minimum amount of personal data 
necessary in order to make sense and avoid references to other identifiable people 
where possible.  
You c an find more guidance in the security section of the ICO Guide to the GDPR.  
https://ico.org.uk/for -organisations/guide -to-the-general -data-protection -regulation -
gdpr/security/  
‘Old’ Data 
You should not be routinely kee ping all the cases that you have assisted with. You 
must decide how long after you have closed a case to keep it for and after this period 
you should securely delete any files containing that data. This is the retention period 
mentioned above and you shoul d do this regularly to show that you are complying 
with principle 5.  
Reporting a personal data breach  
The new Act will set a time limit of 72 hours of reporting a personal data breach to 
the ICO. It is expected that their online breach reporting system wil l continue. 
ALWAYS check the email address of the recipient befo re you send an email 
containing personal data as this is where the majority of breaches occur.  
What Councillors must do in order to be compliant with the GDPR.  
  
It is not  possible to give a comprehensive answer to cover all possible situations in 
which a Councillor  may find him or herself.  The following five suggestions, if followed 
by a Councillor, are likely to avoid the major  pitfalls (apart from not paying the annual 
fee) encountered by a  Councillor in processing  personal  data as part of his/her 
office.  It must be emphasis ed however that these  are nothing more than a general 
guide and that there may be circumstances where more is required or where less is 
required. Each situation must be j udged on its own facts according to the precepts of 
the GDPR. There are, moreover, bound to be further domestic regulations under the 
GDPR which will carve out exceptions.  
 
(1) Get the individual’s express consent to using his/ her personal data in the way in 
which it is to be used. “Use” here includes recordin g and storing the data. Consent 
can be sought automatically.  
(2) Do not share an individual’s personal data with a nyone else without first having 
obtained the express conse nt of the individual.  
 (3) Only use the personal data for the purposes for which you have obtained 
consent.  
(4) When storing the personal data on anything, encryp t the data with a bitlock and a 
sophisticated password known only to the Councillor.  
(5) Delet e informat ion when it is no longer needed. Upon ceasing to be a Councillor, 
delete all the personal data on any device belonging to or otherwise to be kept by the 
person who was the Councillor.  
The General Data Protection Regulation  
(GDPR) Guidance for members  
 
 
 
Local Government Association April 2018   
Do I still need to register under GDPR?  
If you needed to register under the Data Protection Act 1998, then you will need  to 
provide the ICO with information  required and pay a relevant fee, (unless you are 
exempt)  under the Data Protection (Charges and Information) Regulations 2018.  
This doesn’t  mean everyone has to pay the new fee on the date that the new 
Regulations come  into force on 25 May 2018. Data controllers who have a current 
registration (or notification) under the 1998 Act, do not have to pay the new fee until 
that registration has exp ired. 
You can find more detail in the Guide to the Data Protection Fee . 
https://ico.org.uk/for -organisations/guide -to-the-general -data-protection -regulation -
gdpr/accountability -and-governance/guide -to-the-data-protection -fee/ 
 
Penalties  
 
You will be breaking the law if, as a controller, you process personal data, or are 
responsible for the processing of personal data, for any of the non -exempt purposes 
and you have either:  
 
 not paid a fee, or  
 not paid the correct fee.  
 
The maximum penal ty is a £4,350 fine (150% of the top tier fee.)  
Further Information  
This is a very brief overview of the new legislation. For more detailed guidance 
please visit the ICO website which has dedicated GDPR pages to assist you.  
The ICO has produced a guide on the new GDPR which can be found here 
https://ico.org.uk/media/for -organisations/guide -to-the-general -data-protection -
regulation -gdpr-1-0.pdf  
 
 
 
 
 
